our guests are authors Andrew and Leslie
Coburn and their book is titled
dangerous liaison the inside story of
the us-israeli covert relationship the
Coburn's traced the association between
the US Central Intelligence Agency and
the Israeli intelligence network from
the founding of the State of Israel four
decades ago through the recent war in
the Middle East
Andrew Coburn co-author of the book
dangerous liaison the inside story of
the us-israeli covert relationship
what's the premise of your book the
premise is that there's a side to the
relationship between the US and Israel
which goes much beyond just the sort of
sentimental links and the links forged
by supporters of Israel in this country
what we say what we explain is that
there has been since the almost the
earliest days the Israeli state and
these earliest days of the CIA a secret
bond a secret link between them
basically by which the Israelis Israeli
intelligence did jobs for the CIA and
for the rest of American intelligence
and this you can't understand what's
been going on around the world with
American covert operations and indeed
Israeli covert operations until you
understand that the two countries have
this secret range Minh Leslie Coburn
what was the most interesting part of
writing this book well I mean there are
a number of things for example one
particular part which I found most
interesting was we talk about Israeli
operations in Colombia and in some of
the Israeli commandos who trained the
hit squads of the minion cartel it turns
out that they had trained us in Israel
as well and when they were between trips
to Colombia these were the same people
who also trained most of the top
commanders in the Guatemalan military
also trained Leslie Coburn what was the
most interesting part of writing this
book well I mean there are a number of
things for example one particular part
which I found most interesting was we
talk about Israeli operations in
Colombia and in some of the Israeli
commandos who trained the hit squads of
the minion cartel it turns out that they
had trained us in Israel as well and
when they were between trips to Colombia
these were the same people who also
trained most of the top commanders in
the Guatemalan military also trained the
Contras and they were working they had a
fur
that was under license to the Israeli
Ministry of Defense and then they turn
up in the jungles of Puerto boyacá and
Colombia so I mean we had a lot of
adventures I must say the Israelis
cooperate with you at all miss booke
well we talked to you know we never made
an official approach to the Israeli
government or Mossad or anything like
that but we managed to get in the end to
talk to all the people we wanted to talk
to in Israel we talked to people like
for instance David kimchi who was had a
long Mossad career he eventually rose to
be deputy head of Mossad the Israeli
Secret Intelligence Agency the
equivalent of the CIA and I remember a
wonderful evening we had in his home in
his study where he was talking in
guarded fashion about his career in
intelligence he then went on to be a
deputy director general there foreign
ministry but I suddenly noticed around
the walls of his study where we were
sitting
it was like a history of Israeli covert
operations because for instance on one
wall there were the most beautiful wood
carvings African wood sculptures lovely
David where'd you get those Oh
present from Abu - is that yeah that
one's nice where'd that come from Picasa
at Central African Empire then another
walls and beautiful Persian miniatures
er where they come from well present
from the short for something we did for
him so you know just there was this man
sitting this master spook surrounded by
mementos of his career and so we you
know we talked to him we spent a lot of
time talking as well as a street in Tel
Aviv and Avenue called shall Hamel AK
which is right across the street from
what's called the kiria which is the
Ministry of Defense compound it's a huge
area in the middle of Tel Aviv and on
the other side of Shellhammer laka or
row of very fancy high-rises which is
basically the headquarters of these
Israeli military industrial complex I
mean that area is so you have offices of
all the major arms dealers the offices
of the Israeli representatives of the
major American defense corporations you
have Mossad headquarters just on one
side street you have a very beautiful
building which is the headquarters of a
man called Xiao Eisenberg which not many
people in the outside world know
but he's certainly the richest and
probably the most powerful man in Israel
he's the master arms dealer as behind a
lot of political campaigns behind a lot
of politicians again very much involved
in this secret world of arms deals and
covert operations that we talked about
as the link with America there were two
American names early in the book Al
Schwimmer and Hank Greenspun well Al
Schwimmer is again a fascinating
character he right at the very birth of
Israel his real name is a doll Schwimmer
but everyone calls him al he was
basically an arm smuggler for Israel he
was flying in arms during their war of
independence from all over the place he
was originally a TWA flight engineer in
fact but also a brilliant pilot so for
example he was flying arms from Prague
because in the early days of Israel in
fact most of their arms or the moment
their most important single arms
supplier was the communist government in
Czechoslovakia and Schwimmer was part of
that he went on to found Israeli
aircraft industries in the meantime
still sort of flying arms you know doing
covert arms deals around the world and
then years later his energy is still
undiminished he was right at the heart
of the iran-contra business he was you
know absolutely central at one point to
the covert shipments of arms to Iran
Hank Greenspan was another fascinating
guy he he was he was a US Army veteran
the end of World War two
he'd just moved to Las Vegas to set up a
radio station when Al Schwimmer suddenly
knocked on the door he didn't know him
introduced by me to a friend said hey
drop everything I want you to come with
us and we're gonna and we're going down
to Mexico we got a who need you to go
and vet some arms that we've gotten hold
of that we're buying illegally in fact
and we need to get to Palestine for the
strike so shrim
so Greenspan says oh okay drops
everything and get becomes an arm
smuggler briefly he disappears from his
house for six months comes back can tell
his wife or his bin and he's you know
been in Mexico bribe
officials and and then he goes back to
Las Vegas he did it became very famous
as the publisher at the Las Vegas Sun
the opponent of Joe McCarthy fought
Howard Hughes and was also actually
interesting enough he was the conduit
for many years until the campaign
finance laws got tightened up if
candidates Brickley Democratic
candidates who needed cash in a hurry
Hank Greenspan in Las Vegas was the man
to see
because in Las Vegas of course a lot of
cash around and if you and our straights
for instance Jimmy Carter was saved as a
crucial moment of his candidacy in 1976
during the Pennsylvania primary when
Hank Greenspan came up with $60,000 so
you have characters go all the way
through yeah I mean one point about
doing this kind of story about covered
operations with US and Israel is that
because Israel is such a young country
some of these people who were there at
the very beginning who were making the
deals in the 50s are still alive we went
to see is a her L who was really a you
know a towering figure in covered
operations
he was chief of Mossad at a crucial time
in the 50s when the relationship that
the this secret relationship we're
talking about was just getting going and
this is the tight you know there was a
deal made in 1951 ben-gurion came to
Washington and offered the CIA the
services of Israeli intelligence who was
ben-gurion ben-gurion is the father of
Israel he was Prime Minister for many
years he really steered the state to
independence still ease his people to
independence wrote the Israeli
declaration of intent of Independence
was Prime Minister all the way through
with a brief interval until 1963 and
when the Israel you see today is really
the creation of David ben-gurion
originally from what country he was
originally from well from what's now
Poland but was then Russia part of them
in tortures has changed hands let me go
back to Leslie Cobra and ask her who
your favorite character was in your book
favorite character most interesting
person well let's see that's it's a very
tough choice I mean as you you've you've
seen have been there people like you
even have the the original easy and the
book the man called Ozzy that all Ozzy's
are named up what's his name his name is
Uzi call well he he lives in the United
States he lives in Pennsylvania yeah how
did he get know not how did he get his
name how did the name the Uzi gun and
what it was what is well it's well I I
spent a lot of time Tony do is he were
Beth did but he explained to me actually
I'm no engineer and he explained to me
how you know what his idea was who's
he's a guy who thinks about guns a lot
not in any kind of say obsessive way
he's not interested in killing people
I mean I asked him one point about
where'd you find him
I found him he didn't really want to be
just lives in the United States he
didn't he asked me not to be do specific
about where he lives
Bert sits on the East Coast I found him
through other people who were interested
in that he shared his interest which is
you know the engineering of guns I asked
him in fact off the end of a long
conversation I said well you know you're
sort of intimate you well you know who
sees have sort of killed a lot of people
I mean you know you're very famous for
what Izzie's do to the human body he
said yeah I said I read in the paper
about you know so it's entered the
language people talk about you seeing a
house so I expect him then to say you
know I'm sorry about that and he said he
said I didn't deserve such Fame he said
I just made a good gun so he's got pride
in his creation yeah was he when he
invented the Uzi and what is it for
people who've never seen an Uzi well
it's a it's an automatic it's basically
a submachine gun but more it's small
it's great virtues are that it's very
stable when you fire it it doesn't a lot
of these kind of guns you know they sort
of the recoil will pull it all over the
place and because of some design
features he thought of it's a very very
stable gun I mean you can hold it and
pull the trigger and it went sort of
jerk around it's also very
my ball went jam it's easy to maintain
and you know the basic model he designed
in a British Jail was where you had the
original idea he's he was living on it
converts just when when the British
still owned Palestine and the British
came and raided the place for arms of
which they found a lot and carted Uzi
off and he started to have this idea
about you know what a really good gun
would consist of and it came out and he
actually sort of started to work on the
prototype in the in this farm sort of
the machine shop where they repaired the
tractors so it's you know it's become
then he was you know bought by the
Israeli army and they decided to name it
after him American Secret Service shoes
the American Secret Service use it point
out in the book I mean right here in
Washington you got the Secret Service
guarding the president of the White
House with Aziz and a few blocks down
the street you got the dope dealers you
know guarding their patch and
eliminating rivals with Uzis so it's
it's the universal gun of choice how did
you two meet we met him in London years
ago we met at a at a club called
Zanzibar actually in London what were
you doing I was at the time I was
finishing graduate school over there at
soaz which is the School of Oriental and
African Studies I was also had just
started working at NBC News where's home
originally San Francisco and what is
your relationship well we're married and
we work together we make films together
for PBS Frontline and we write books
together so it's a very close
relationship what other books have you
written this is our first together but I
wrote a book called out of control which
was about the Reagan administration
activities in Central America it was
about covert operations down there and I
wrote a book called the threat which was
about the Soviet military out of control
had what impact on our body politic well
it was interesting because I had
actually spent a long time covering
Central America the North operation for
CBS News in New York where I was work
at the time and I broke the story for
CBS about the North operation in Central
America so then wrote a book which was
basically about our adventures in
finding out about this stuff in Honduras
in Washington bars and restaurants in
Costa Rica it got into the seamier side
of what was going on down there with
operations where'd you get your original
interest in this kind of a story well I
think it it gelled for me when years ago
in London there's a very famous arms
dealer called Sam Cummings who did a lot
of work for the CIA he's one of the
biggest private arms dealers in the
world and he fascinated me and what
fascinated me was his ability to go into
a situation and supply arms in little
Wars and he had no problem at all with
supplying both sides and that kind of
mentality of the arms dealer coming in
into a little war it just got me very
fascinated with little Wars I'd also I'd
lived in Africa while I was at Yale I'd
spent a lot of time in the third world
even then can you go back to your early
childhood somewhere or your high school
or college years and point to someone or
some parent or somebody that said that
gave you the kind of boost to get into
this kind of work I don't think so I
think it was a series of things I think
living in Africa when I was a student
was very helpful where'd you live I was
living in a village in Kenya up in the
mountains a place where they'd never
seen a white woman before it was quite
an interesting experience
why were you living there because I was
very adventurous in fact I mean I've
done a lot of things like this and you
know as well as covering Central America
I've covered the war in Cambodia that
the this recent situation I went to
Saudi Arabia during the Gulf War I was
you know in Israel under this guards
this is what I like to do what do you
remember about meeting Leslie well what
were you doing I was uh I was at this
party sitting at the bar but when I was
working at
I think at the precise moment and what
year this was 1976 got that right what
was I doing I was working for a British
sort of investigative show called world
in action in Britain the networks that
you know they have a lot of
documentaries on television it's much
more a routine thing so we used to was a
weekly show and we used to actually was
a wonderful operation used to be sent
off and you could basically do almost
what you want it I mean vital it was a
good story I think at that time what was
i working on I was working on a story
about how the that had there was a huge
argument going on then I suppose as now
as to whether you know nuclear power was
safe and there were these rumors I'd
heard that there'd been a nuclear
accident in the Soviet Union and this is
long before the days of glass toast and
so forth that they've been a nuclear
accident Soviet Union and that of that
was very mysterious no one knew much
about it but something terrible was
supposed to have happened 20 years
before and I set out to dig into this
and I found actually was the first sort
of contact I had with Israel I found
someone in Israel who was a witness to
this accident who somehow been allowed
to emigrate and tracked him down and
tracked other people down I just
remember sort of happy time alive
because I met Leslie and also was
working on this terrific story so where
were you from originally I was from
Ireland I grew up in Ireland my father
Scottish but we're an airline County
Cork East Cork and what was life like
growing up there and when did you leave
their life was interesting it was like
actually we didn't have a the early as
we didn't have a car or a telephone or a
fridge so I grew up no we you know went
everywhere by horse I grew up in a sort
of nineteenth-century way and there was
no difference in the way we were living
in some 100 years before communicated by
telegrams perfectly if I can tell people
who under the age of a hundred and ten
that it's a perfectly viable way to live
I left there I guess when I was
seventeen and went to work in London
went to school where I went to school
in the American sense I'm into Oxford
studied studied is probably exaggerating
it a bit was listed as studying history
back to the look what do you think of
the Israel what do you think of Israeli
people what you've learned over the
years being close to him well both of us
love working in Israel I started working
in Israel I've been going back you know
every year for not not every year but
have made numerous trips to Israel since
1980 1981 Israelis are very interesting
people also I mean fact is Israelis love
to talk and are very tend to be at least
in this business in the arms business
and in intelligence fairly gregarious
and also they have a lot of feuds with
each other very strong personalities so
it's it that means it's a very
interesting group of people to to work
with are they tough are the effective
like them yes really I got to say I do
very tough have an engaging cynicism
about them I did how could you not like
it for instance we're talking to me this
may sound bizarre but for example we
were talking to an executive this is
some years back an executive of Israel
Aircraft Industries which is the huge
Israeli defense aerospace it's the
biggest business in Israel in fact
because a single firm and this sort of
time when was the early eighties that
been a rabid argument here in Washington
because the United States had wanted to
sell f-15 fighters to Saudi Arabia and
the Israeli Lobby here kicked up a huge
fuss saying you know you shouldn't be
selling these planes but if you must you
shouldn't sell them with the you can't
sell them with the extra fuel tanks that
will enable them to reach Israel when
bomb Israel should the Saudis get that
idea so the car but Carter
Administration had agreed that you know
the f-15s would not have the extra fuel
tanks few years let fuse later we're
talking to this gentleman from Israel
Aircraft Industries did you remember
those fuel tanks the weren't allowed to
go to Saudi Arabia
yes and he said you remember how that
ban got dropped she's had by that point
I said yes he said do you know where
those fuel tanks get made that way Tel
Aviv we make them so I mean he was he
delighted he thought it was a great joke
and a great sort of business coup that
his firm was making the fuel tanks which
would theoretically at least allow Saudi
Arabia to bomb Israel I mean for example
you have things like um we got to know
quite well a man who we referred to in
the book as the colonel who is American
intelligence official working in Israel
spying on Israel spying on the Israelis
and of course the Israelis knew he was
doing it he knew they knew he was doing
it and when he got to the end of his
term in Israel the chief of Israeli
military intelligence threw him a big
going-away party and said we like you
you're more Israeli than the Israelis
now get out of here and don't come back
so it's a it's such an interesting
interplay between these people you tell
a story early in the book you know I've
never heard anyone pronounce his full
name so I don't even know who's right
James Jesus Angleton or they call him
has Zeus what what did he ever
he's always everyone although it should
be hisses because that was in
recognition of the Mexican half of his
family everyone was pronounced at Jesus
you tell an early story about a monument
to him near Yad Vashem the memorial to
the Holocaust explain that story right
well if you're going in there on the
outskirts of Jerusalem on the western
side at least you have Yad Vashem which
is a very moving memorial to the
Holocaust if you take the road past
there out of town you go down the hill
and you wind through a pretty village
and you eventually come to the mosque
all the Jerusalem Forest which is full
of memorial groves if you'd like to to
people that you know get honored in this
way war heroes or several people who
have been killed in war people
recognized by the State of Israel and
three we were driving through this one
day and the reason we were doing this
was we were looking for the Memorial
Grove Memorial Forest to James
Jesus angleton
because Angleton was a CIA man a senior
CIA official very famous for a number of
reasons but he was of interest to us
because he was the link for many years
between the CIA and the Mossad and the
Israelis it all said to us his old
intelligence friends that said oh yes we
love Jim and Jim was a good friend to
Israel and we'd like Jim a lot and in
fact when Sir you know after he died
which is in 1987 we erected a memorial
in a crater memorial forest for it it's
out there and you know I suppose it's
bit hard to find you might not want to
look for it but I can tell you that it's
there so we thought we're gonna take a
look so we drive out and there all these
nice grows with nice plaques carved in
stone to various people we can't find
the angle to memorial and eventually we
decide to give up we think we've taken
we've you know taking a wrong direction
or something so we're looking for a
place to turn and there's an open space
or it looks like an open space we drive
up but it isn't let's see it's basically
a garbage dump with a few stunted dying
little trees poking up and a plaque
actually on plastic screw to the stone
to James Jesus Angleton so this was the
Memorial Forest and we felt it's kind of
hard to explain but it's in a way it was
an Israeli joke you know it was look you
know we're supposed to like you a lot
we're supposed to oh you a lot but we
don't know anyone anything so here's
what we really think of you and it's a
garbage dump dad he's dead
but not forgotten look new book just out
about him yeah but it doesn't really go
into the Israeli side which is what
interests us you know yeah the Angleton
did a number of things he was you know
he's best he's been most written about
because he was head of CIA
counterintelligence and was searching
for you know got obsessed about her a
soviet mole in the CIA but although that
may be the most publicized role he had
he did other things too in his most
important job really and this is the
role that the agency has always been
very keen to obscure in fact they
prevented one former colleague of his in
the agency from writing a book about him
because they said oh my god if he writes
that book he'll talk about this
particular job which was Angleton's
as a liaison with foreign intelligence
services including the Israelis
particularly the Israelis in fact and
this was an absolutely key roles a lot
of bodies buried there but cars if what
Angleton was able to do if there was
things the CIA couldn't do or didn't
want to be seen doing or you know what
to do in this country which is legally
precluded from doing Angleton could go
to his buddies as liaison could go to
his buddies in foreign intelligence
services and particularly the Israelis
and say help us out and that you know
that was angleton was really the sort of
point man for the connection that we
explained in the book what would happen
if all American aid Israel stopped and
the Israelis had to shut down their arms
business what happened in that country
it would be a disaster why because the
arms business is the is the engine that
drives the economy of Israel you know
it's the biggest export it's they have
to at this point it's such a huge part
of the economy that they have to
continue shipping arms which is why one
reason why you get a situation where
they're shipping all over the world and
particularly you know unattractive
situations like shipping to South Africa
so it's it's all driven by money by the
desperate need to keep this business
going I mean people will say to you well
we had to we had to go into the arms
business in a big way because we wanted
to become self-sufficient because of the
pot there's always the possibility of a
next war but in fact what's happened
because they're very military aid
depended on the u.s. what's happened is
that it they're more and more dependent
on American components on American
research and development and you know
the hardly self-sufficient and also I
mean there's another element of that
which is the they have this huge arms
industry that they have to keep going
and it's the major provider of
employment in the country especially of
well-paying jobs their markets as sort
of were as Wars sort of tailing off
around the world they see as their
principle future growth market the
Pentagon here so they're becoming they
know they're becoming trying to be in
fact more
or dependent on getting more business
out of the US out of the US military
which certainly does you know doesn't
make them self-sufficient if your
economy depends on selling stuff to the
Pentagon or tending that way you know
then that makes that connection even
greater but there's also on the
intelligence side of things when I say
their need for for this industry the
military industry is desperate you
haven't a whole intelligence branch that
was set up called Lechem to get
high-tech you know military technology
around the world by any means and that
includes stealing it so you've had a lot
of cases over the years of Lechem
operations including in this country
going around to different companies and
getting a hold of the blueprints and
carting away boxes to bring back to Tel
Aviv because they have to stay ahead of
the curve the Israelis lied to the
public well you know there are a number
of things in talking about this kind of
stuff covert operations national
security subjects there is censorship in
Israel so a lot of these things can't
even be discussed I mean we talked about
in the book the Israeli nuclear program
and break some ground on this you know
we talk about the Israeli chain of
command that it takes the Prime Minister
that the head of Mossad and the defense
minister to to make the decision to push
the button to push the nuclear button is
this the nuclear facility at Damona
that's correct is that the only nuclear
facility they have well it's a it's an
enormous nuclear facility I mean but
what we've discovered you try to go
there I've been to Damona yes inside no
no no no that's very difficult where is
it it's down in the Negev it's out in
the middle of nowhere and what happens
is when you go to Damona if you happen
to stop the car and take a picture of it
or film it or whatever you know you're
you're out of there very quickly one
Defense Intelligence Agency friend of
ours said that he had more flat tires in
front of Damona than anywhere else in
Israel but but what we also discovered
was that Israel not only has nuclear
weapons but sophisticated tactical
nuclear weapons just like we do remember
the army used to have the American army
used to have nuclear landmines for
example all over Germany
well the Israelis we've discovered have
nuclear landmines seated on the Golan
Heights and at one point Ariel Sharon
who is of course famous for the invasion
of Lebanon whatnot went to beggin and
said look you're busy you know and and
had a terrible relationship at the time
with the chief of Mossad he wanted to
take over sole control of the nuclear
button and beggin
fortunately said no but this kind of
thing I mean that's why it's the
Israelis have gone wild for the book and
they they've serialized it in marieve
and written about it in Haaretz because
they they can't talk about this sort of
stuff unless it's been printed abroad
before or even her Etsy or what their
two very large Israeli papers her ETSU's
the kind of New York Times of Israel and
marieve is the big conservative paper
and you point out in your book that one
of the things you did differently with
this book is had a lot of translations
of a lot of Hebrew and Israeli
newspapers why because there's a lot
amazing amount of information that
appears in in Hebrew and the Israelis
feel comfortable about this because if
it's in Hebrew it's like it's among
themselves that doesn't get translated
into English I mean they're very
conscious of the feeling that Hebrew is
like a code I mean not many people
outside Israel actually speak it so you
know if you can say something in Hebrew
it's almost like saying it in secret so
we discovered that for instance the
Hebrew press in Israel is some a is a
very very good know that a lot of very
good journalists they're very good
newspapers the amazing amount of
information that never finds its way
into the dispatches of you know
correspondence of you know foreign
correspondents from Israel very few of
whom actually speak Hebrew and he's in
certain order nor does it appear in the
English language is ready papers like
The Jerusalem Post I mean someone said
to us you know what the function of the
Jerusalem Post is and we said what he
said it's - it says to give the fact
that give the American ambassador a
happy breakfast so we so they're very
conscious of you know Hebrew is for us
and English is for everyone else
we also found that you know books and
also so Diaries documents there's a
treasure trove I mean that is read is of
course you know good at keeping secrets
I mean a good oh you know it's not like
they spill everything out and have total
freedom of information but there is
still a wealth of detail and information
and color and a lot of what you need to
know to understand the connection we're
talking about in in Hebrew how did you
get it translated when was it expensive
yeah but we thought it was you know it
was worth the investment
can you give us an example of something
that you learned it was in Hebrew that
we never saw in English sure the 67 war
for example the you know the general
people people's general view of the 1967
war was all the Arabs that have ganged
up on Israel maybe even attacked Israel
and the Israelis fought them off and won
the great victory which got them the
West Bank that people argue about today
in fact we gave you a quick background I
mean according to you know the these
well liberal this way we found a book of
memoirs written by a guy who was the
military aid to the then Prime Minister
of Israel
Hillary Israel in your and he gives an
account in here in his in this book
which has never been translated into
English it's available only in Hebrew in
fact wasn't even a sort of bestseller
there he gives an account how on June
the 3rd 1967 two days before the war
broke out he was at the home of the
prime minister and they were waiting for
the head of Mossad to come back from
Washington because the head of Mossad
have been sent to Washington to get a
mission to get the green light to launch
the war and he explains you know we knew
we could win he's explained already in
the book he says we knew we could win
the generals were hot to go they weren't
really scared of the Egyptians or anyone
else where they wanted to go ahead with
this and the Prime Minister been saying
no we can't do it we can't attack until
we have American permission and he gives
us very vivid description of how Mara
meet the head of Mossad comes back into
the room at midnight now they're all
it's the sort of high commander sitting
around and this being an Israeli meeting
the air is thick with cigarette smoke
and
and a meet walks back in they say well
what is it you know is it war or no war
will they let us go and I meet says well
I'd be given to understand the Americans
have told me that they would bless us if
we crushed NASA that's it
they started the war on Monday morning
and he'd been to Washington he'd seen
Richard Helms they had the CIA and a few
very few other very senior officials and
also including him certainly James Jesus
Angleton and they got permission to do
it so that was something that never been
in English I mean it really you know
once you've read that you understand
that things are a bit different from the
sort of kind of histories you read in
English what are you to live now
Washington and where do you two work
besides doing books like this now well
we have lead a busy life we make
programs for ABC News I made two
programs big programs during the Gulf
War for them big our on Cambodia and
together we make films for PBS Frontline
and have for some years now but you
operate as outside consultants in this
case or outside producers not on the
payroll every day of these organizations
oh absolutely I was on the payroll of
one of the big networks for years CBS
News and found that if you're on the
payroll all the time then you can't do
anything else and because we like to go
back and forth between films and books
also we like to go back and forth
between two different you know PBS and
ABC or one of the network's are quite
different how do you get Coburn out of
Cockburn it was some idea that happened
back in Scotland several hundred years
ago I'm not responsible but but all
Coburn's carry this mission through life
is your name is spelt Cockburn but you
pronounce it Coburn and there are people
who give up the struggle and spec change
the spelling to Co be URM but we regard
them as backsliders who is Alexander
Coburn he's my brother
whose older he is and do you still have
a relationship with him and sure what's
he do for a living now we don't see him
in the Wall Street Journal anymore he's
very nomadic he basically Alexander he's
among his many interests is collecting
classic American cars these I think you
know has 12 of them distributed you know
these are late 5th the big monsters in
the late
50s and early 60s and he hasn't
distributed around the United States so
he's basically he moves around the US
and I saw the Great Circle Route and he
has cars everywhere so he but he he
lives missed the time actually out west
he incredibly busy and incredibly
productive I have a younger brother too
who spent the war the recent Gulf War in
Baghdad he's the correspondent he's the
Middle East editor for an English
newspaper the independent and your
brother was very opinionated and very
very visible especially was in The Wall
Street Journal does that give you a
problem that people automatically
ascribe his views to you know sometimes
i mean not really i mean it's um he
often gets confused with me as well okay
so we've you know i just get used to it
a you Alexander now I'm Andrew or
whatever it's Annie also gets confused
with Patrick of course who's most of the
time in the Middle East and how about
politics to either one you consider
yourself strong political people
I don't did you get accused of that
though well look whenever you're looking
into this kind of stuff
whenever you spend your life you know
collecting frequent flyer miles to go to
places like Cali Colombia and Dhahran
Saudi Arabia and Thailand and you know
when you're actually going out and
finding out stuff the world doesn't fit
into a neat little package it's always a
little different from what people expect
it to be so of course you're always
gonna get it's always controversial the
truth is controversial people have
trouble sometimes making desi yet we
were talking to a master Israeli arms
dealer
kosher peek Shapiro who looks the part -
he wears very expensive dark glasses and
silk shirts and smoke big cigars and
seeing talking to him in his very
elegant office opposite the Ministry of
Defense in Tel Aviv and as he's
explaining what she'd been do you know
he was we were talking like we're
talking now and as he was saying oh I've
done this and done that chef peek took a
cigar and I said I see you're a spy more
than once but there was another agonda
master Israeli intelligence operative
who we were in Manhattan
late at night we were in the hotel room
grilling this guy for information and he
said he turned to us and he said your
Shin Bet which is you know the domestic
Israeli intelligence so it's as I say
it's always more confusing than it seems
one other thing a another quick question
how many times have each of you been to
Israel who you list a whole bunch here
like 81 82 83 84 like every year is that
both of you go do you travel together
sometimes together sometimes separately
we've been for different things so we
did a big we did an hour for frontline
about three years ago yeah that well we
traveled several times together it was
four or five times for me Utley yeah
when they see you coming into the
country do they do anything special like
trail you oh no I feel very comfortable
working there I mean as I say I was
there during the Gulf War under the
scuds and had absolutely no problem at
all in fact I broke the story about the
Patriots misfiring it was very
interesting because you know in a
situation like that it's it's pretty
scary and most people whipped on their
gas masks and went into their sealed
rooms but of course you can't see
anything in a sealed room and there's no
telephone it's you know you're
completely in the dark you may as well
be in Washington so we set up on the
14th floor balcony of the tel-aviv
Hilton where we got a brilliant view of
what was going on and then could rush
down and you know go see what the damage
was but one night for Patriots there was
a battery very close to us the Patriots
and the first one flew up and exploded
in midair the second two flew solo over
Tel Aviv that they were going under some
of the larger apartment blocks and the
fourth took off went up and did a
hairpin turn and came down in front of
us and I said that's it I got on the
phone to New York and said this is
really a very bad situation because you
know you the population of Tel Aviv was
suddenly in a position of not only have
Scud they're having scuds raining down
on them but Patriots - I was just saying
the question of being trailed in Israel
and Israel's if you're if you're not
Palestinian at least it's quite an easy
easy country to get into the the
interrogate on the way out is when they
talk to you
at this you know as in most airports
they want to do a security check and
sort of CV I've got a bomb in your
baggage but that they also they're
giving a prolonged interrogation as to
where you've been want to see your hotel
room want to know who you've talked to I
mean it's and as international flights
tend to leave Israel at four o'clock in
the morning I mean you're so you've
gotten up at two or not gone to bed or
groggy and then suddenly remember sort
of you know the interrogators everyone
you've talked to in the last month is
can be quite a training experience you
tell the story about a group from
Philadelphia Philadelphia Jews I believe
making the pilgrimage to Israel and then
you also at one point talk about being
one of you you're the other maybe both
of you together we're with Arik Sharon
travelling near near the Green Line the
West Bank and being able to what I'm
getting out here is there were some
cynicism coming through all this about
what the Israelis do about American Jews
coming to Israel on the pilgrimage who
wants to tell that well and the Golan
Heights trip ins and mr. ravine coming
in with his helicopter and landing and
all that if I remember correctly yeah
there is cynicism and it's very
interesting because frankly you have a
situation where American Jews come over
and their donors I mean I had the
experience of being with a group of very
big donors and we went up to a spot and
the West Bank overlooking what's called
the coastal plain
I was with Ariel Sharon and he was
making the point to them of how
dangerous it was to give up the West
Bank because of course then you could
have missiles flying in from Jordan and
you know could hit Tel Aviv whatever
anyway so so he gave a very good
demonstration he had the charts everyone
was listening then they all got back up
on the bus and he turned to me and he
said don't you love it here isn't it a
beautiful spot for a summer house if you
have to understand that I mean obviously
Sharon takes security seriously I mean
this guy is it is a general and has been
involved in numerous Wars and in Israel
however he's Israeli and there is a
sense
we're here and you're not no you live in
New York or you live in Philadelphia
we're here there's also a very there's a
there's a certain snob ISM that we talk
about as well there is a group in Tel
Aviv who are regarded as they're called
wasps and what wasps mean it's not the
same connotation but but it's what white
Ashkenazi sabra's would protects yeah
which means that you know you you were
born in Israel and you've got the right
connections from the ruling class go
back to the group from Philadelphia
what is the tour when someone when an
American Jew comes to Israel and their
donors where do they take them well a
number of set routes but the tour we
talk about here is a security tour where
they're taken to see like the one lezzy
described you know the spot on the Green
Line where to show you know how
vulnerable Israel is or the Green Line
is the old border with the West Bank
it's you know now it's notional it's
it's the border of the of the West Bank
from Israel proper so be taken to places
like that to Masada
maybe Masada is so it's a very
interesting place it's it's this
fortress or a rock rising out of the
desert in the south and it's on the top
of the sort of ruins that have been
excavated in the last few years it's
where the last Jewish rebels against the
Romans held out in 87 to in AD 70 and
the Romans built these enormous ramps to
you know friends matter of effort to get
sort of siege engines up this sheer rock
to take the place and just before the
Romans broke in they all committed
suicide so this is you know for recently
it's a very sort of holy spot - for
Israelis Masada and - the Golan Heights
for example which again is very vivid -
if you want to sort of convey a sense of
Israeli vulnerability you say when the
Golan Heights before 67 the Syrians were
up here looking down on Israel and they
could shell us and indeed did and you
know
attack settlers and so forth and we
described in the book the scene where
all these philadelphians arrived to to
witness an Israeli army firepower
demonstration and we really tell it
through the eyes of an Israeli who was
watching it was a correspondent for
Haaretz big paper because he reacted to
it he said this is ludicrous how
demeaning for us that we have to put on
this circus for all these for these
Americans who don't understand us and
they you know and he describes he
basically describes he's ready soldiers
having to perform like seals just for
the gratification of the American donors
in order to sort of wait for the handout
and he said it's very demeaning for his
readies to have to sort of do this and
there's Reysol cynical peace hero
there's the handout come eventually no
well yeah the hand out the overall
handout of course will for one reason or
another is you know many billions of
dollars a year and although the private
donations aren't as big as the US
taxpayer donations they're still very
large Israel bonds or direct
contributions so that's something the
Israelis picked we did have attention to
was it was it the former defense
minister being that came in in the
helicopter yes in debt this father in
the goal and the in the middle of it all
sort of nonsense like a fairground was
an announcer crackling announcements in
English and this was supposed to be they
would say we're showing you the Israeli
army in training except all the signs
were sort of in English which would be
odd since you know Israelis speak Hebrew
and all the commands that were issued
were in English too which is again odd
for a real demonstration the middle of
all this in a pup pup pup in comes the
helicopter with its sacra beam who makes
us assume it a stirring speech and
everyone presented medals and awards to
each other and then the the IDF the
Israeli army went on to attack the
quote-unquote Syrians which was a pile
of barrels and blew them all apart guess
the what I want to ask you is that do
you think that this group of leaders
meaning everybody in the intelligence
community in the military and in the
government are sitting behind the scenes
laughing at the Americans coming over
giving the money no that's much too
strong the the reason why we put that
anecdote in the beginning of the book
about the demonstration that wasn't a
real demonstration was you know it
that's one side of Israel but we
immediately asked people to take a tour
down this street that Andrew mentioned
before shall Hamrlik next to the
Ministry of Defense which is the real
the real Israel for this security system
but they didn't take the Philadelphians
down the street where the defense
ministry is located no and they're they
don't get to spend time with these kinds
of people absolutely why not because
this is a world first of all because you
know if you if you're not in the
business in some way or or you know
meddlesome journalists like us where I
go there you know I mean they would have
nothing in common they would have
nothing to discuss these are very tough
seasoned operators we're talking about
here and they can't be bothered with you
know seeing a tour group unless they
happen to be a politician I asked you
earlier whether or not the Israelis lie
about what they're doing and I want to
ask you the same question about the
American government you catch the
American government in a lie when you're
covering them about things like arms and
drugs sure I mean the the American
government I mean the number of lies on
the record that means continuing of
continuing embarrassment the great lover
and the great lies of the 80s was the
for instance that we weren't selling
arms to Iran well we were we were doing
it through our Israeli proxy in fact as
we revealed in the book the we were
doing it from day one of the Reagan
administration we have a someone we
spoke to actually on the record a
general Avraham Tamiya was like the sort
of Brent Scowcroft sort of shadowy
backroom backroom figure in a adviser
high-level advisor to these ready
governments through the 1980s I mean he
told us how Al Haig
them permission to to sell arms to Iran
from day one of the administration he
also described to us again a lie I mean
the was the lie that that we weren't
involved in any way in the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon he described how he
and Eric sharone came to Washington in
the spring of 1982 to get the green
light to invade Lebanon and you know he
lays it all out and he explains why Haig
wanted them to do it and he said he said
no Hague sort of said okay we want a
minor operation and then Tamir went like
this he said it's a big word minor I
mean did this huge war American
government lie of course all the time I
think I mean you know we saw it in
spades in the 80s particularly what we
know of now is Iran Contra but
interestingly enough even as part of
that on the Central America side of
things for example we were not given a
very good picture of what Israel's
involvement was in Central America
during that war in fact what we reveal
in the book I mean not only did you have
the operation like tipped kettle where
William Casey turned to the Israelis and
said we want a you know hundreds of tons
of weapons for the Contras which he did
which they delivered you had Israeli
advisers running around Honduras as
early as 1981 you had one of the guys on
the contra Directorate would go
regularly briefed the Israeli consul in
Tegucigalpa Honduras about how the war
was going in Panama Manuel Noriega I
mean no one wants to touch him anymore
but he was certainly great friends with
people in the White House and in the
agency as part of the whole Contra
effort and at his right hand was my
kirari
known as mad Mike in Panama who was
former chief of clandestine operations
for Mossad for Israeli intelligence
this is nuria's business partner this
was a guy who imported half a billion
dollars worth of Israeli arms into
Panama
and was intimately involved with the
secret side of the operations of
training and supplying the countries
that were coming out of Panama where did
you get all the intricate knowledge that
you have of the mic Harare departure
from Panama on that night of the
invasion well that's interesting because
that comes from that's piecing do you
know there were there were a few very
good journalists there at the time
Americans the Hebrew press has some
excellent I mean there are people over
there who really tried to track that
down because they were very interested
to see my core re suddenly back in Tel
Aviv at a time when the US military
controlled the ground the air all exit
points this guy suddenly disappears and
also the Panamanians have come out you
know the guy who became the the chief of
staff of the Panamanian military said
that the US officials told him to stay
away from her ie not to ask questions
just stay away from it you say you got
out in a c-130 well we don't know
exactly how it got out whose c-130 well
I think there's only one country that
has c-130s in the net that neighborhood
and that's the United States but we
don't actually know how he left the
country how he left Panama but he left
at a time when he shouldn't have been
able to get out where is he now back in
his house I think about he's still
building his new house in Tel Aviv right
yes that's right and he and my kirari
was involved originally in the Olympic
massacre well he wasn't involved in the
massacre after right he was in charge of
a hit squad that was set up by Mossad to
go round personally ordered by the then
Israeli prime minister Golda Meir to go
around assassinated killing the you know
the Palestinians who had been involved
in the Munich the massacre at the Munich
Olympics in 1972 and it all came to had
some success and then it all sort of
crashed to earth when they went off to
Norway he and his team to to deal with a
guy they thought was the red Prince a
very sort of important Palestinian
and they that was that matter they got
ready and then they killed him and it
turned out to be a problem a rocking
waiter when you find out things that are
new and different and revealing about
governments that lied you get mad or do
you get excited when you find it oh is
what's what's your personal reaction no
I don't get mad I got very excited I got
very excited what we were working on
this book when we got a hold of some
documents that a lot of FBI files and
others that had been secret which were
released under Freedom of Information
about the cover-up of a series of White
House's administration's of Israeli
nuclear espionage in the United States
and sitting there poring over those
documents reading accounts of White
House meetings reading memos from for
example when Nixon came into the aw into
office the second thing he asked Jagger
Hoover to do for him was get me the
files on Israeli nuclear espionage and
likewise the Johnson administration when
CIA director DeKalb's briefed Johnson on
what was going on with the Israeli
nuclear program Johnson said don't tell
anybody not even were Oscar McNamara who
were of course is too very senior people
so that kind of you know being able to
find out getting a glimpse of what's
happening in the real world what's
happening on the inside is if you get
mad or do you get excited sometimes I
must say the sort of enormous e of some
some crime takes my breath away and I
you know I think yes I do get indignant
sometimes but I would like Leslie and I
think like most journalists you know
think when you actually find out I'll
figure out ah that's what they were up
to that's you know that it's a great
soul surge of excitement you get when
you have that feeling here's who the
book is dedicated to Chloe and Olivia
who is it how old are they
seven and twelve they typed that
dedication themselves they wanted to
make sure it got in they didn't trust us
to do it so they went up to the
typewriter and dude how did you both
have time to have two children in the
middle of all this running around well
when I was pregnant
with the first one I was let's see when
I was eight months pregnant I think I
was working in on a story in West Africa
at the time in Liberia when I was
pregnant with the second one I was
working in Israel I was working in
various on various stories so just keep
going what's next we're headed back to
the Middle East not to Israel right now
although since these rays are very
interested in the book we'd probably
probably should go there but no we're
going to the going to other countries in
the Middle East we're working on another
frontline film and do you want to write
another book
oh sure what if you had it if you could
do it today what would you write it
about I couldn't say I couldn't say I
mean they're ideas that are already
starting to gel for us but we won't do
another one probably for another year
either of us I don't think
yeah that's pretty writing a book is an
intense experience which don't to repeat
too often here's what the book looks
like it's called dangerous liaison the
inside story of the us-israeli covert
relationship and our guests have been
co-authors Andrew and Leslie Coburn
thank you both thank you thank you
join us next week on booknotes when our
guests will be author live--i Baker in
her book justice from Beacon Hill his
Baker examines the life and career of
former Supreme Court justice Oliver
Wendell Holmes
that's next Sunday on booknotes at 8:00
and 11:00 p.m. Eastern Time for a
transcript of tonight's programs send
five dollars to c-span transcripts in
care of tape writer incorporated post
office box 885 in Lincolnshire Illinois
the zip code is six zero zero six nine
coming up next on c-span it's our weekly
program devoted to the people and
politics of Great Britain we take a look
back on British prime minister John
Major's trip to the United States and
his meeting in Kennebunkport Maine with
President Bush this week recently
c-span's for your information Department
received this letter regarding the
c-span audio